docs: add ZKsync OS and Airbender docs (#384)
matter-labs/zksync-docs: content/20.zksync-protocol/15.zksyncos/00.overview.md

Reviewer: I think it's missing two parts we added recently: L1 integration and double accounting of resources. They can be added later, but just commenting to not forget to do so

Author: added

bootloader input. Some code can be skipped in this mode as well (e.g. merkle proof verification for the storage reads).
2. **Proving Running Mode:** To be used during proof generation. The code runs on a pure RISC-V platform without an OS,
so memory management must be handled manually.
Additionally, special care is needed to pass external data into the RISC-V machine due to the absence of standard non-determinism sources.
All behavior must be fully deterministic and provable.

---

## System Resources
In ZKsync OS, the concept of "resources" is required to limit and charge for both computation (primarily proving) and data usage.
This is more complex than it may initially appear: ZKsync OS is designed to be EVM gas-equivalent,
meaning that EVM code execution should follow the same gas schedule as on Ethereum.

However, the EVM gas schedule does not accurately reflect the cost of ZK proof generation.
To address this mismatch, ZKsync OS introduces [double accounting](#double-resource-accounting): tracking both
Execution Environment (EE) gas-equivalent to EVM gas, and a "native" computational resource that models the cost of proving.

> ## Double Resource Accounting

Reviewer: IMO this is a bit too complex for an overview, why not a different page?

ZKsyncOS implements a double resource accounting model, where both a Execution Environment resource (EVM gas, for instance) and native resource are tracked.

> The interface to interact with resources can be found in [resources.rs](../zk_ee/src/system/resources.rs).

Reviewer: This link is broken.

---
title: Overview
description: Introduction to ZKsync OS
---

ZKsync is rebuilding the core of the protocol around two complementary
pillars: [**ZKsync Airbender**](/zksync-protocol/zksync-airbender/overview),
a next-generation proof system,
and **ZKsync OS**, a modular execution layer capable of hosting multiple virtual machines.

In this section, we will deep dive into ZKsync OS.

## ZKsync OS: The Execution Layer

> ZKsync OS is a system-level implementation for ZKsync's state transition function. It corresponds to the operation layer of ZKsync's new

Reviewer 2: Suggestion:

ZKsync OS is a system-level implementation for ZKsync's state transition function. 
Under ZKsync's new architecture, execution is decoupled from proving.
ZKsync OS acts as the operation layer in this new architecture.
It takes block data and an initial state as input and computes the
new state after the application of the block.

architecture. It decouples execution from proving. As such, it's responsible for taking block data and the initial state as input and compute the
new state after the application of the block.

ZKsync OS is implemented as a Rust program that will be compiled to two targets. This first one, x86, is used for running in the sequencer.
The second, RISC-V, is fed as an input to the ZKsync Airbender prover to produce the validity proof of the state transition.

## Components of ZKsync OS

ZKsync OS is designed to support multiple VMs. This is needed to seamlessly migrate old Era chains while adding full native EVM equivalence.
In addition, this will allow us to support alt-VMs.

The main components of ZKsync OS are:

- [**Bootloader**](/zksync-protocol/zksyncos/bootloader): The entry point program. It initializes the system and then

> runs transactions using system and Interpreters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
runs transactions using two components: the system and the execution environment interpreters.
```

- [**Execution Environments**](/zksync-protocol/zksyncos/execution-environment): Regular interpreters that take bytecode,
calldata, resources (similar to gas) and some other call context values

> as its input. Interpreters are instantiated (with some local state) to execute a frame. When an interpreter sees a call to another contract,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as its input. Interpreters are instantiated with some local state to execute a frame. When an interpreter sees a call to another contract,
```

return/revert from current frame, or contract creation it triggers special functionality to process it, as a potentially different
interpreter should be run.

> - [**System**](/zksync-protocol/zksyncos/system): Common for all environments and bootloader. Provides abstract interface for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [**System**](/zksync-protocol/zksyncos/system): Common for all environments and the bootloader. Provides an abstract interface for
```

low-level handling of IO (storage, events,

> l1 messages, oracles) and memory management. The system communicates with the external oracle (non-determinism source), it’s needed to read block data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
L1 messages, oracles) and memory management. The system communicates with the external oracle (non-determinism source), which is needed to read block data
```

, and also for some IO operations, e.g. to perform the initial read for a storage slot.

> ![zksyncOS.png](/images/zksyncos-airbender/zksyncOS.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
::centered-container
![zksyncOS.png](/images/zksyncos-airbender/zksyncOS.png)
::
```

This modular design enables us to isolate a minimal interface required to implement an Execution Environment. In addition, the system abstraction
makes the storage model customizable and allows for different instances of the entire system.

### Running Environments

As mentioned before, we have two targets for ZKsync OS. However, this is not just a compilation target, but also how some system primitives
are handled.

The two running environments are:

1. **Forward Running Mode:** To be used in the sequencer. In such mode we expect code to be run on the usual platform with OS,

> so default memory allocator can be used(it’s part of the OS). For non-determinism source, we can just pass Oracle rust implementation as a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
so default memory allocator can be used (as it’s part of the OS). For non-determinism source, we can just pass Oracle's Rust implementation as a
```

> bootloader input. Some code can be skipped in such mode as well(for example merkle proof verification for the storage reads).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
bootloader input. Some code can be skipped in this mode as well (e.g. merkle proof verification for the storage reads).
```

> 2. **Proving Running Mode:** To be used during proofs generation. The code is running on the pure RISC-V platform without OS, so we should manage

Reviewer 2: suggestion:

To be used during proof generation. The code runs on a pure RISC-V platform without an OS, so memory management must be handled manually. Additionally, special care is needed to pass external data into the RISC-V machine due to the absence of standard non-determinism sources. All behavior must be fully deterministic and provable.

memory, also different non-determinism source needed to pass the data inside the RISC-V machine. And we should prove everything.

> In order to achieve that we want to have some way to configure the system, as mentioned above - oracle, allocator, disabling/enabling code that

Reviewer 2: I'm confused what you're trying to say here. I also think saying "In order to achieve that we want" makes it seem like we haven't figured this out yet
